Contains I-TASSER results downloaded from I-TASSER server.

# Goal

Predict the structure of protein domains using the [I-TASSER](https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/) server.

# Approach

- I-TASSER server requires registration.
- Sequences are submitted on the server website, with a limit of 1,500 amino acids. [This FAQ page](https://zhanglab.dcmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/FAQ.html#4) explains why the limit and what to do with large proteins.
- Once submitted, an SXXXXX id will be provided and the result will be made available usually in 1-2 days.
- The results can be directly viewed on the server website, and can also be downloaded as a bzip2 tarball.

**Issues related to secondary structure in the model PDB files**

- secondary structure information is NOT encoded in the pdb files for any of the models generated by I-TASSER
- when viewed on the server website, the models are rendered by JSmol and shows nice secondary structures, which are actually calculated by the program inside JSmol.
- after downloading the tarball and expanding it, viewing the html page in the browser will NOT show the same model views.
- the structures viewed in Pymol using the model pdb files could look different than the one rendered by JSmol. This is because when secondary structure information is not included in the pdb file, Pymol uses a program called `dss` to assign the secondary structure. `dss` could produce different results from the program that most other software, including Jmol, appear to use, called [`dssp`](https://swift.cmbi.umcn.nl/gv/dssp/DSSP_3.html).
- it is possible to download and run `dssp` locally to assign the secondary structure and output the information as header for the model pdb.
    - recommended: install `dssp` through `conda` (also for `pymol`). instruction [here](https://pymolwiki.org/index.php/Dssp)

# Early notes
## 16 March 2020
1. Submitted N terminal domain to [I-TASSER](https://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/I-TASSER/) and used default options
1. Saved output

## 1 April 2020
- Uploaded RAS ITASSER results from case study, submitted full protein and used default options
