# Introduction & Methods
Dotplot analysis in order to visualize the self-self and between-Hil-members similarity. The dotplot analysis was performed in Jdotter (Brodie, Roper and Upton, 2004, Bioinformatics) using `../../input/B8441-homologs.fasta` as input for both the horizontal and vertical sequences. The sequences were arranged in the order of Hil1-8, from the longest to the shortest. In the user interface, I set the GreyMap tool's lower cutoff to 60 and upper as 245 and saved the plot as a jpg.

# Results
- Looking at the diagonal (self-self) first, we see that Hil1-6 contains substantial self-similarity in the central domain, as is consistent with the result of XSTREAM tandem repeat detection). In particular, Hil1-4 contains longer repeat units, as shown by the off-diagonal hash pattern made of semi-contiguous lines. Hil5,6, and to a lesser extent Hil 7 and 8, exhibit "blobs" of dots. Upon closer inspection, these regions contain short tandem repeats like GGNGNG that are repeated a great number of times.
- There is substantial between-homolog similarity among Hil1-4 in their central domains (all eight homologs share the NTD, which is not the focus here). By contrast, the level of between-homolog similarity between the group of Hil1-4 and the group of Hil5-8 is significantly lower, with the exception of the serine-rich region present in Hil1, 2, 6, 7, 8 (and to a lesser extent in Hil 5), and short stretches of tandem repeats present in Hil7 and 8 that seem simiar to those in Hil1-4. The latter is notable in that the short region of similarity between Hil7,8 and Hil1-4 contains the GVVIVTT-like motifs, which are present only one to a few times in Hil7 and Hil8 but are highly repeated in Hil1-4.

# Conclusions
Through this analysis I learned a lot more about the composition of the central domain of Hil1-8. Hil1-4 share a lot of similarity in their tandem repeats, which most likely had the same origin but expanded/contracted differently after the gene duplications leading to these four homologs. The tandem repeat unit present in Hil1-4 is detectable in Hil7 and Hil8 but only occur once to a few times. Hil5 and Hil6 are devoid of that tandem repeat unit and correspondingly they lack the GVVIVTT-like motifs, or any other TANGO hits for this matter. Instead, they contain blocks of highly repetitive sequences in their central domain, consisting of even shorter repeats.

Based on the above observation, my hypothesis for the evolution of the central domain repeat regions in the _C. auris_ Hil family is that the ancestral sequence contained the repeat unit that included the GVVIVTT motif. This unit is present in large numbers in the present Hil1-4, in low numbers in Hil7 and Hil8, and seem to have been lost in Hil5 and Hil6.
